In Seattle, young David Lightman, a computer enthusiast,
is a skilled and promising hacker who wants to break into the computer of a well-known video game house,
Protovision, based in Sunnyvale, Silicon Valley, is about to launch a series of new products.
By wardialing all phones in the same region as the company,
the boy manages to reach different devices,
including a secondary NORAD supercomputer connection
designed to develop strategies to respond to a Soviet attack:
WOPR(War Operation Plan Response).
This calculator, located in the NORAD fortress command base,
assess actions and countermoves to a possible Soviet attack based on execution
of numerous strategic games and military simulations and,
Through rudimentary artificial intelligence, he can learn from his mistakes.
Once he read the list of such games, David is convinced that he has reached the Protovision,
but he can not access the computer.
Aided by her classmate Jennifer, she asks her friends' technicians for advice,
who suspect the military origin of the list of games
and advise him to look for any backdoors left by the creator of the system so he can try them out.
Starting from the first game on the list ("Falken’s Labyrinth")
David is able to trace the original programmer, Stephen Falken,
an officially deceased scientist working for the United States Department of Defense.
Looking for information on Falken, he can hack into the system using the name of his son who died in an accident as a password,
"Joshua," and a game of Global Thermonuclear War begins against the WOPR,
A game in which he assumes the role of the Soviets.
After a few minutes, David has to abandon the connection,
but the supercomputer has already alarmed the army’s senior staff by reporting an imminent nuclear attack,
leading the United States of America’s Defense State (DEFCON) increasingly to war.
If for the boy it is only a game, so it is not for the computer
that does not discriminate between virtual reality and actual reality,
continues to report the attack operations initially chosen by David,
They are mistaken by the military as real actions of the Soviets.
The American counter-moves attract the attention of the Soviets,
who will regard them as genuine provocations,
and begin in their turn to prepare for the worst,
in a crescendo of tensions that could really lead to the outbreak of a nuclear war.
The boy is soon located and interrogated but, to the story of what happened, no one believes him
to make matters worse, the WOPR persists in searching for him to continue the game and,
Yet another move by the program, David, believed responsible, is arrested for espionage.
He manages to escape, but he needs to get in touch with Professor Stephen Falken, who turns out to be still alive,
to try to stop the WOPR. Falken has for many years now retired to private life on an island,
dedicated to paleontology and the study of dinosaurs. Joined by Jennifer and David who can talk to him,
is now cynical and disillusioned,
due to the finding that his efforts in the field of cybernetics and artificial intelligence
were put at the service of the military ruling class. Falken makes parallel with the dinosaurs,
once rulers of the earth then totally extinct,
and he believes it may be natural for man to follow the same path.
When everything seems lost David manages to touch the soul of the scientist:
recalling that the WOPR backdoor password was "Joshua",
name of the little son who died with his mother in an accident.
The young man asks Falken if he would allow the destruction of the world even if
Your son was still alive.
The scientist, although initially hesitant, finally convinces himself to help David and together with him back to NORAD,
entering the war room before the huge armored door seals it from the outside world.
David and Falken convince General Beringer, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces,
to wait for the first impacts before ordering retaliation,
certain that the missile and Soviet bomber tracks that the NORAD screens show approaching
are actually the result of the game played by David. Despite the immense risk that this entails,
General Beringer agrees and,
while the screens in the room report the total destruction of numerous military bases and installations,
direct radio contact with targets ensures that they are completely intact.
The situation seems resolved, but the same exclusion of the human factor, advocated by computer engineers,
it seems to turn against its creators: the WOPR however prepares the countermove and,
by direct connection to missile silos,
has no need other than to use a comprehensive solution search algorithm:
start sending you all possible launch codes,
since one of them is definitely the right one.
A few moments after the launch of the missiles however, it is David to save the situation,
ordering the system to play three of a kind against itself:
the consignments shall stop one after the other in a stalemate
And then Joshua starts one war simulation after another,
leaving aside the continuation of launch operations,
with the codes he had already found. After having obtained also here a sequence of identical results:
"Winner: Nobody", finally learns that in certain situations "the only winning move is not to play."
Joshua interrupts the game and, recognizing his creator, invites him to play a game of chess.